Okay, we're in the homestretch, everybody
we are going to cover a couple things and
then we're going to get this thing live so
let's do third party data.
Getting data from another system
is probably the number one
task that you'll get hit
with is a Gatsby developer.
Somebody's got their data in Air table or
Excel or WordPress or sanity or
contentful, or any of these third
party systems, and they're going to
want to make a website out of it, or
as it's becoming more and more common.
You'll actually get multiple sources
they'll have products in Shopify, and
blog posts insanity, and
you'll want to bring all of that
together Gatsby is really good at this.
We talked about source plugins and one of
the things that Gatsby does really well is
sourcing data from third party systems,
especially anything that would bill
itself as like a headless CMS or
other kind of headless commerce, headless?
Whatever the term headless tends to mean,
we store the data and
provide API's to access it and that means
that it's a perfect match for Gatsby.
So let's go ahead and load in some data,
I'm going to use sanity so
sanity is a great
let's let's just give it a little peek.
So this is sanity it's
a really developer friendly,
good free tier way to manage content
if you if you need a headless CMS,
It's configured through code
it's got a good back end it's,
it's it's just nice in
general I like the team.
So this is what I use to manage
the the learn with Jason website,
so on learn with Jason I
list all of my episodes and
each of these is stored in sanity,
so what I need is
the ability to pull these in and
display them somewhere.
So if I was going to do this in a Gatsby
site, Saturday is a great match for
this so for me this is pretty much exactly
what I want so what I haven't showed yet
is this this Gatsby plugin we got
there kind of incidentally as
we were talking about
Gatsby source file system.
But the the plugin library for
Gatsby is is pretty incredible if you
get into this plug in library and
you start looking around We want to
use sanity okay, let's look at sanity.
And we can find in here here's
Gatsby source sanity so
I'm going to click on this, and it gives
us all the instructions that we need on
how to make it work so
we're using Gatsby v3.
So that's great let's go ahead and
just install this thing so
I'm going to npm install
Gatsby source sanity
And now, that we've got that,
we can go and configure it so
I'm gonna get into my Gatsby config,
Down here.
And at the very bottom, really doesn't
matter, you can add it wherever you want.
I'm gonna add one more
plugin config object, and
this one is going to resolve Gatsby
source sanity and for the options,
the Gatsby source for
sanity has a few things that we can do.
If you want to just read data, you can
get the, Public data, which is what goes
on a website from sanity just using its
project ID, and then you set the data set.
So I wanna use production as
the data set now my learn
with Jason instance ID Is,
you can all use this so
you don't have to go set up a data
source is this VNK, up JYP.
And this is read only,
like it's only going to let you pull data
that's public so anything that you can
get through this Source is something
that's already on my website.
So it's not we're doing a security risk or
anything you don't have a right
token you don't have the ability to,
go and mess with the data
this is just to read it so
after I've saved this,
I can start my server NPM run develop.
And what I really love about this is
because we've already looked at how to get
images, how to get MDX posts,
how to get site metadata,
I bet you already have some inkling
of how we're going to do this.
So if I go over to graphical now, even if
you've just heard of sanity for the first
time looking at this, I bet you could
figure out how to create content from
sanity data because of how predictable
Gatsby's data models All right.
That's the magic of this so if we go in
and we look all sanity episode, all right,
let's get the nodes cool I want to get the
title and let's get the guest name right?
So we can see here's the first
look at Gatsby functions
here's JavaScript autocomplete with straw
day on here's introduction to view,
okay, so
those are out of order let's order them.
We're gonna sort by, let's go by
date if we can find it somewhere
down here's the date we're going
to order it red, descending and
hey, now we're into the future these are
posts that are happening in the future.
So I could do like a date is,
let's say less than or
equal to today so let's do like 2021,
811 let's see if that works,
yeah, there we go,
so these are the episodes that have
been published before today, so
not anything that's scheduled,
just stuff that's already happened.
And another way that we can
do that is I know that a post
has happened if it has a YouTube ID, so
I could say instead of filtering
on the date I can filter
on whether or
not the YouTube ID does not equal null.
And we get the same result so
there's a few ways that we can do that now
we just happened and I happen to know that
because I work on this site a lot but
you could pull it in in
whatever way you want it.
Now, usually like it traditionally
in Gatsby version two and prior,
what you would have done at this point is
you would have popped open a file called
Gatsby node, you would have
started digging into node API's,
you'd have to run the Create Page calls
and be providing paths and context and
there's there's a lot of stuff that
would need to happen to make this work.
Fortunately, we don't have to do any of
that anymore we can just let Gatsby do all
of that work for us and this is another
thing that I think is just like
such a cool addition
that they added in v3,
which is the ability to create
pages based on file names.
If you've ever used next j s,
this is going to look pretty familiar,
but you can do sanity episode,
I'm going to write this out and
then we'll break down what I just did slug
underscore underscore current .j s okay,
so let's look at this file name and
talk about what it is.
So what I'm doing here is I'm saying and
you know what,
I want this to live in a folder so
let's give it a folder called episode and
I'm going to move this
inside yes all right.
So in here,
we have a folder called episode and
that's because I want each one to
be prefixed with slash episode and
then we're saying, sanity episode.
Slug current and that's all in curly
braces so the curly braces signify
to Gatsby, we want to dynamically
create the name of this file so
we're going to generate the path
based on what is inside here.
The Sanity Episode is the data
type of what this thing is so
if we look at the The docs on this,
if I go to query and
then we'll go to let me just
filter this sanity all sanity
episode what we get back is nodes and
each node is a sanity episode.
So I'm basically getting,
I'm saying I want to look for
each sanity episode that we can find
I want to create a new file and
we're going to use the slug and
I want to use the the subfield current.
So we're saying use the sanity
episodes and as the actual name For
the path, use the slug current field
the double underscore signifies
that we're using a subfield of slug.
So this is a little bit head bendy to
look at initially when you're looking at
the data, but this is pretty slick
because it basically means any data that
you have We can now generate a file
from it like that really, really cool.
So let's do that ,let's
actually make that happen.